We've talked a lot about props.
We talked about emits.
And so something you might be
thinking though is that, well, okay,
this makes sense, right?
I can pass data down to my components, but
at some point this might
get kind of cumbersome.
And so I wanna kinda give you a micro
version of the button exercise that I give
in the Production Grade Vue workshop, so
if you want to check that out for this.
But let's, for a second,
think of a component that's going to pick
this out real quick as a base button.
And so for this base button,
you probably are thinking, well,
it's a button component.
And what kind of props
that I wanna pass to it?
Well, if we think about it,
we can say, well, usually,
you need to have some
texts on your button.
So okay, let's call that a text prop, and
then I'll do the shorthand
typing right now.
So this is an alternative, by the way,
for prop where if you don't wanna do
the required and default, you just
pass the title directly like this.
But again, generally speaking,
I think it's a best practice to define
whether it's required or
if it's not required and has the default,
basically do your due diligence on that,
it helps your team in the long run.
Okay, well, there might be some text here.
And then what happens if your product
manager is like, you know what,
I think I want to use the icons on
the left hand side, then you're like okay,
maybe like icon left string or maybe just
icon, right, cuz you're okay, as an icon.
As an icon, it's going to the left.
And then they go, well,
actually depends cuz the icon
might be on the left or the right.
And then you might start getting the hint
of where I'm going with this when you're
like, okay, well I can write, and
for now I'm just keeping it simple
just keeping these strings.
So it's like okay string.
And then all of a sudden it's like,
well, I also need this to
replace a loading spinner,
in case it's like fetching an API call.
And all of a sudden, what you got here
is this massive list of props for
what is really just a button component,
right?
Especially for something like this text
here, can you imagine how complicated
the V-if else-if is gonna be when
it's like if floating shows this but
else this but
then also there's an icon then do this,
like this button will become very,
very troublesome to manage.
And so of course,
Vue has an answer for this.
And the answer for
this is around the idea of slots.
And so slots are an interesting concept
in that we have been using them this
whole time when it comes to HTML.
So how does a slot work?
Well, let's go and just show you how.
Let's just refactor this real quick.
So icon, let's do this.
Icon text.
So I just wanna have something
that will render on the page, And
then, we'll say, okay, so let's go.
Actually, since this is a playground, let
me move the base button to playground so
that this can be consistent.
Base button is going to source,
going to components.
There we go, perfect.
And then to keep that consistent,
we'll just do base button and kebab case.
We'll hide that.
And then now, let's make sure I'm
running the playground app, so
we don't run the wrong one.
Cuz nothing's more infuriating than
thinking being in the wrong environment
and thinking your code is not changing.
Okay, so we have a base button here,
App.vue.
So import BaseButton.
BaseButton from here.
Base and button.
And then this is specifically BaseCounter,
Okay, how does BaseButton work?
At the moment it is BaseButton, and
we can give it a text of Hi,
and the icon of Arrow, okay.
So what happened up,
I think I did not close it.
There we go.
Okay, we see it here, right?
It says Arrow and Hi, great.
What we wanna avoid when it comes to props
is being overly descriptive with how
something is supposed to be used.
It's useful for guidance,
it's useful as a guardrail.
But when it comes to something like
what text belongs in a button,
it doesn't often make sense to do
something like that with a prop.
So instead, what do we do?
Well, there is a built-in
element called slot.
And so it's globally available to
your app at all times because this is
a Vue component.
And slot, if we think about it,
it actually functions just as you would
expect when it comes to HTML,
you just didn't realize it.
So rather than being like,
I wanted to say Arrow and
then dash Hi, this is a BaseButton.
And we call it like a normal component,
and we say, Arrow Left and Hi.
And if you're looking at this going like,
isn't that HTML?
I'd say exactly, it's just like HTML.
[LAUGH] Why complicate things beyond that,
right?
There are times where you just wanna let
people just define whatever they want
inside of your component.
Now granted, eventually you could do some
fancy things regarding maybe some props,
maybe there is an a point where you
have some base icon here, for example.
But slots are one of the most powerful
features of Vue in the sense that it
allows for flexibility,
it's almost like in that regard
the complete opposite of props.
Where props you're being
very prescriptive,
do this with this type this is
required to do it in this place.
Slots is saying, all right, I'm open,
like you basically work with me here.
And so the cool thing about slots too,
is that slots are more intelligent
than a standard HTML element in that you
can actually provide it a default content.
So we can do is we can say, yes, so
we'll just call it submit by default.
And so, when you do that, this means that
when I go ahead and delete what's inside,
you'll notice it automatically
falls back to that content.
Which again, can be very nice for
just sort of providing some conventions,
especially when people start having
design systems and that sort of thing.
So okay, most of our buttons are submit,
we can go ahead and say, okay,
all BaseButton have a default of submit,
but otherwise the moment someone needs to
override it, easy-peasy, this is no
longer submit, this is now cancel.
As you can see, updates,
just as what you would expect.
>> And you can bind that,
obviously, to your data or-
>> Yep, exactly.
So the question here is around,
can we do more than this?
Yeah, because we should treat this
just like any other HTML element.
So in here, we can do something like,
userData.name.
And there you go.
It just works.
That is one of the things that always
excites me when I look at how Vue API is
designed is extensibility on what
people already understand, and
then just leveraging the heck out of it,
why not?
Why not sprinkle on some syntactic sugar,
some superpowers that make it even easier,
right?
Because, again, slots inherently already
work from a HTML perspective but now you
can provide default content, we can
actually do if conditions for slots too.
So if you had something
like called direction, and
let's say direction's here,
and we say v-if left.
We could use slot for v-else.
And then, so let's say the default
is actually this Submit.
But otherwise,
if it has a configured prop of left,
it might be like Icon Left,
whatever, Cancel.
And so what you got here is
I'm really overriding it.
But if we come in this year, save you see
that submit is falling back as we will
expect, but if we have, opps, I think
my v-if direction doesn't make sense,
actually I can just do left, that's fine.
So I do left, is a Boolean and
the default is false.
So like that, you see Submit does come up.
And then we can say left is true.
Icon left cancel.
So that's pretty cool.
But what else can we do?
There's even more because if we
think of slots like a mailbox slot,
we might wanna have multiple slots
on a component, not just one.
And so what if we were to
do something like layouts?
Well, if you had a layout component,
Let's say I'm gonna do base-layout.vue.
What you're probably gonna end up having
is you probably have some sort of div that
is your class wrapper, right,
assuming you have a design system, but
then you might wanna start figuring
out where things are being slotted.
So for example, you might have an aside
here, that is class like sidebar.
And then you probably have somewhere where
you wanna render out your main content.
And then you probably
have your footer content.
And so again, if you do this by
traditional props and that kind of stuff,
it gets really painful because how
do you pass components into props,
that's a whole messy matter.
But what we can do is we
can give our slots names.
So this can be the sidebar slot.
This can be the main slot.
And this can be the footer slot.
And so the way this would work is,
if we're inside of our App.vue,
we can go ahead and import base.
Let's see, let me duplicate this one, and
then bom bom, BaseLayout from BaseLayout.
We organize that to be alphabetical,
great.
Okay, then we get our BaseLayout.
What we can do now is we can now
define specific snippets of HTML to go
in specific places.
How do we define HTML?
We have our template element.
And so I know it's like, whoa,
there's a template in a template.
But again, if you look at MDN,
template is an actual HTML element.
It's a content template element,
this is a thing.
I think a lot of people at one point
will say, that looks like a Vue thing.
No, this is in the MDN docs.
This is fairly standard.
And so what we can do is we can say,
look, this is the aside.
And how do we tell the template
that we wanna go there?
Well, we do the v-slot directive, and
we tell it the,
I believe this is Aside, like this.
And so if this renders correctly,
base layout.
[SOUND] Wait, I did not,
I call this sidebar.
So, of course, there's nowhere to go,
so I misnamed it sidebar Aside.
There we go.
And so let's give this a little
bit of styling just so
that we can see the difference.
So let's go ahead and
give a sidebar border 2px solid red.
And then we'll go ahead and
do the same for each one, so
we'll have main, and
then we'll have footer.
And so we'll make this green,
we'll make this blue.
And so you can see right now because
nothing's being passed to the slot for
main or footer,
nothing's being rendered just the Aside.
And so all we got to do
now is we can go ahead and
add things like template, v-slot main.
And then I can even do things like
actually render the user card.
Actually, I could even just
take this component right here.
Let's take the user card here,and
just drop it directly inside of main.
And so you can see here that it's
actually being rendered inside.
Although where did my borders go?
Main class.
I didn't give it a class.
Class main.
There we go.
Did you have a question?
>> I was wondering if the components
that are not the slots
rendering the DOM when you
bring that template in.
>> So you're saying that if I don't-
>> So
currently you have nothing in
the footer slot or a footer element.
>> Good question, and
the answer is, yes, it is there.
Because as far as Vue is concerned,
what you're saying is this is the scaffold
specter to render, there's nothing.
Well, Yeah,
I guess it would be a little bit tricky to
as far as like checking make sure the slot
like whether the slot is empty or not, so
at that point, though, I would say that,
if you started to get conditional about
what content is showing insight, at that
point, it would make more sense to make a
slot name of a slot a footer, for example.
And then maybe the default is to have
some content in here, but then otherwise,
let someone completely overwrite it and
then that way, if there is no slot,
nothing gets shows up at all.
That's probably the way I would
approach it in that particular case.
So here we go.
We have that, what did I forget?
There we go.
Boom.
So we can see now the footer
actually is rendering, and so
all I got to do now is do the template
V slot footer inside of here,
and then let's drop
the base counter in there.
Boom.
And so slots become really powerful
because if you've ever worked with like
a backend CMS where users are defining
layouts, now you have the ability to,
like when you're fetching data to actually
drop things where they're supposed to go.
As opposed to having to configure,
this is my two column layout,
this is my three column layout,
this is my two column with one.
Like, there comes a point where that
becomes very tedious to maintain.
And slots do a lot in terms of
opening up a lot of reusability and
composability when it comes to that.
What's cool about this too is that because
it's programmatic in terms of assigning
its property, there's no, like it doesn't
have to appear in a certain order.
So for example,
I'll just swap these to show that.
You'll see that even though technically
inside of here, we've ordered it as
like a side main, whatever is totally
being controlled at this level.
And so as a result, you can again it says,
allows for more composability and
flexibility when it comes to that.
And the other thing I wanna leave you off
with before we dive into exercises and
other questions is that if you're
looking at some other code bases,
not everyone writes out
the V slot directive.
And this is a convention within Vue 3, and
that you can shorthand it
to just the hashtag symbol.
The way to think about it is like
the idea of the slot that you
want to put the template stuff in.
To be honest, I find it a little bit
confusing because if someone doesn't
know what this is and
tries to Google this,
sometimes they might end up with CSS
stuff, something like this shorthand.
I personally,
I don't tend to use it again,
it is in code basis which is why
I'm telling you all this exists.
So if that's your team's convention,
I would say roll with it.
Personally, though, I don't mind actually
being explicit about slot sidebar, I
think this to me is expressive and I get,
yeah, personally, that's what I prefer.